---
layout: page
title: Biometric Privacy
image: images/biometrics/titleimage.jpg
permalink: /projects/biometrics/
---

![protest](/images/biometrics/protest.jpg)
---
---
---
---

Lucy Parsons Labs (LPL) is committed to protecting the civil liberties of
Chicagoans and the people of Illinois by shining light on the dangers of
biometric surveillance and facial recognition technology. This technology should
be banned immediately.

Emerging technologies such as facial recognition, biometric identification,
social media monitoring, license plate monitoring, and predictive policing are
often used as a panacea for disrupting violence and securing our communities.
Police officers claim that these technologies help resolve crime, prevent
terrorism, and locate missing children. However, as the Chicago Police
Department continues to [spy on the
victims](https://onezero.medium.com/chicago-cops-use-social-media-to-track-grieving-families-of-gunshot-victims-e68e5a6dc40c)
of violent crimes, they solved less than 16 percent of murders during the first
half of 2018.

Since our founding in Chicago on October 2015, this non-profit has filed
hundreds of public record requests under the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act. These public records significantly increase the transparency of how police
departments utilize personal information. As this information is often not
disclosed to the public, LPL has to litigate against law enforcement agencies in
order to bring these records to light.  

This transparency is imperative as facial recognition technology is notoriously
[inaccurate](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/dyzykz/detroit-police-chief-facial-recognition-software-misidentifies-96-of-the-time)
and threatens the civil liberties and personal privacy of all 12 million
Illinois constituents. In violation of the First and Fourth Amendments, the
government is provided unwarranted access into its constituents’ private lives.
Although we live in a free society, such software enables the government to
unlawfully create a “detailed, encyclopedic, and effortlessly compiled” overview
of a constituent’s life, precisely what the Supreme Court found unconstitutional
in _Carpenter v. USA_. Furthermore, cybersecurity attacks increase when cities
compile and maintain highly sensitive biometric data, which then leads bad
actors to misuse such data.  

## Inaccurate Algorithms Classify Innocent Individuals as Guilty
The Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown Law found that inaccurate
police [facial recognition algorithms](https://www.perpetuallineup.org/)
disproportionately affect African-Americans. Similarly, the National Institute
of Standards and Technology found that Asian and African-American individuals
are likely [misidentified by facial
recognition](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/19/technology/facial-recognition-bias.html)
technology up to 100 times more than Caucasian men. Ninety-two percent of facial
recognition matches are
[false-positives](https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2018/05/uk-police-say-92-percent-false-positive-facial-recognition-is-no-big-deal/),
therefore connecting innocent individuals with crimes they did not commit. These
statistics are alarming as this error-prone technology consistently
misclassifies women, people of color, and younger generations.

LPL’s public records requests and lawsuits have revealed that police officers
rely upon highly inaccurate, racially biased algorithms to determine innocence
and justify arrests. As such, biometric and facial recognition technologies
subject innocent individuals to dangerous encounters, permanent injuries due to
violent arrests, and police harassment. LPL’s campaigns enhance awareness about
how community members should be able to freely gather in public spaces without
fear of wrongful arrests caused by unseen, unregulated, and inaccurate
algorithms.  

## Collaboration and Education

LPL is leading a diverse coalition of over seventy-five community groups to ban
the use of facial recognition technology. LPL hosts webinars with community
partners to educate about:

 - The alarming ways in which the Chicago Police Department uses technology (e.g.,
facial recognition technology, biometric technology, social media monitoring,
and license plate monitoring) for surveillance purposes;
- The potential consequences that may occur if politicians do not soon pass moratoriums; and
- The impact of biometric surveillance on our rights to privacy, anonymity, and
free expression.  

## Advocacy and Legal Action

Together, these community organizations protect constituents, educate community
members, dismantle utilization of facial recognition and biometric technology,
and enhance transparency about how police departments use these software
programs. By uniting their power, the union also educates politicians by writing
letters, publishing opposite the editorial pages, and meeting with members of
the Chicago City Council. The alliance also lobbies and [converses
with](https://www.aclu-il.org/en/candidate-answers-facial-recognition)
policymakers to empower suspension of facial recognition technology expansion
amendments.

In a resounding victory, the Illinois Supreme Court [ruled in
favor](https://lucyparsonslabs.com/posts/BIPA-Victory/)  of a brief LPL joined
in defense of  the Illinois’ Biometric Privacy Act, the strongest privacy law of
its kind in the country.  The Privacy Act prohibits the collection and storage
of facial and fingerprint identifiers of current and former residents of
Illinois. This landmark ruling is critical because while other cities have
introduced bills to curb [the use of facial recognition
technology(https://www.eff.org/aboutface/bans-bills-and-moratoria), a facial
recognition vendor called Clearview AI illicitly collected [three billion
images](https://chicago.suntimes.com/crime/2020/1/29/21080729/clearview-ai-facial-recognition-chicago-police-cpd)
scraped from social media and other online sources. Clearview claims not to be
[constricted](https://www.muckrock.com/foi/atlanta-325/facial-recognition-atlanta-ga-76491/)
by state biometric privacy laws. However, our work defended the right for
[anyone](https://www.aclu.org/press-releases/aclu-sues-clearview-ai) in Illinois
to bring monetary claims against Clearview and vendors like it.

LPL continues to drive action to dismantle the utilization of inaccurate face
geometry data so we may one day live in a world free of discrimination due to
biometric and facial recognition technology. These goals will prohibit companies
from capturing personal data for profit and police from collecting biometric
data for inaccurate and racially biased algorithms. By pressing pause on the
disturbing trends in biometric surveillance, we help create a safer world where
civil liberties will be better protected, and police officers will not arrest
innocent people for crimes they did not commit due to inaccurate algorithms.

![gif](/images/biometrics/gifs/slower/Face-rotate-vectorpunk_s.gif)
